##My Terraform Day 3 Journey

Today was an exciting day in my Terraform learning journey! I finally completed Day 3, and I feel like I’m starting to truly understand how Infrastructure as Code works. Here’s my story:

#Setting Up the Stage

The first step was configuring Terraform to communicate with AWS. I created a provider block that told Terraform:

-Which cloud to use (AWS)

-Which region (us-east-1)

-Which profile (terraform-user) with my access keys

At first, Terraform was failing to connect because I had previously deactivated my access key. I checked my AWS IAM console, re-activated the key, and then Terraform successfully authenticated. This reminded me that active credentials are mandatory for Terraform to work.

#Building My First Server

Next, I worked on the resource blocks, which are basically instructions for Terraform on what to create in the cloud.

Security Group – I created a security group that allowed SSH and HTTP access.

EC2 Instance – I initially tried t2.micro for my instance type, thinking it was free tier eligible. Terraform returned an error:

"The specified instance type is not eligible for Free Tier."

I double-checked AWS documentation and replaced it with t3.micro, which is free tier eligible. Once I updated that, the EC2 instance launched successfully.

I also added a user_data script so the server would automatically:

-Update the system

-Install Apache (httpd)

-Start the web server

-Display a personalized webpage

#Challenges Updating the Webpage

When I first updated the user_data block to show my personalized message:

“Hello, Grace just completed Terraform Day 3 challenge! 🚀
I’m super excited to grow in cloud and DevOps! 💻✨
Terraform makes infrastructure fun and repeatable. Let's keep building!”

…the webpage didn’t reflect the changes.

I learned an important lesson about Terraform:

user_data only runs on instance creation, not during in-place updates.

Updating a running EC2 instance with new user_data doesn’t automatically apply.

To fix this, I added a timestamp tag to the instance:

tags = {
  Name    = "TerraformDay3WebServer"
  Updated = timestamp()   # triggers a replacement
}

This forced Terraform to destroy the old instance and create a new one with the updated HTML. Once that was done, the webpage finally showed my updated, colorful, and personalized message.

#What I Learned

From this challenge, I now understand:

-Provider blocks are like the “bridge” between Terraform and the cloud.

-Resource blocks define exactly what I want in the cloud — servers, security groups, and more.

-Free tier eligibility matters when selecting instance types. Terraform errors can guide you to the solution.

-User data only runs at creation; updating it requires replacement or manual intervention.

-Using tags with timestamps is a clever trick to force Terraform to re-provision.

I also realized how hands-on typing the code helped me catch errors and build muscle memory.

#Why I’m Excited

I can now deploy a server, configure it automatically, and see results live; all from code I wrote myself. That’s incredibly empowering! I feel like a real DevOps engineer in training.

I can’t wait to explore automating more AWS services.

Terraform is no longer just lines of code to me, it’s magic that turns text into cloud infrastructure. And today, I saw that magic in action.

#Next Steps

-Improve understanding of Terraform lifecycle and best practices

-Keep documenting my journey to solidify learning

#Final Thoughts

Day 3 was challenging but extremely rewarding. I didn’t just run commands, I understood what was happening behind the scenes. From fixing inactive keys, checking free tier eligibility, to forcing updates for my HTML, I solved real-world Terraform issues.
